README.md, before:

<p align="left">
  <img align="left" width="150" height="150" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/refs/heads/master/doc/aperture_logo.png" alt="Aperture Viewer - Advanced Photography and Videomaking Viewer">
</p>

# Aperture Viewer: Development Fork for Pioneering Visual Experimentation (Based on Firestorm)

**Independent Development - Test Releases, Learning Hub**

Aperture Viewer is an independent fork of Firestorm by William Weaver, created for **novel visual feature exploration** in Second Life and OpenSim.  Not an official Firestorm project and not intended to compete, Aperture Viewer is a personal testbed, built on Firestorm, for developing and testing features with user feedback.  Aperture Viewer and its GitHub also function as a learning hub, to:

*   **Investigate Advanced Visual Techniques:** Explore innovative graphics enhancements in Second Life/OpenSim.
*   **Develop & Refine Artistic Tools:** Enhance Phototools and visual controls for advanced image creation.
*   **Gather User Feedback:** Offer a public platform to test and provide input on new features.

**Focused on Visual Exploration, Learning, and User Feedback**

Aperture Viewer, focused on visual exploration, learning, and user feedback, is tailored for virtual photographers and videomakers interested in next-generation visuals in Second Life/OpenSim. It offers a platform for innovative rendering experiments and the enhanced Phototools system by William Weaver. Beyond code, Aperture Viewer is a valuable learning resource. Features are developmental, with no guarantee of Firestorm integration.

For those unfamiliar with William Weaver's virtual photography and videomaking work, see examples on his [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@colorscompletely/featured) and in these online photobooks:

[none of this is real](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1538c17kHuoY-0jg0_YIwBcLOPsf5-diO/view)

[we all have this madness](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L5yp10VYebDS9Nai9Ti0GHtGMeuac0Yz/view)

<br/>

> [!NOTE]
>**Important Disclaimer:** **Aperture Viewer is not a substitute for Firestorm Viewer for general use and is not supported by Linden Lab or the Firestorm Viewer Project.** This is an independent, community-developed *test* project based on the open-source Firestorm Viewer code, intended for visual experimentation, user feedback, and as a learning resource.
>*   **Open Source Based on Firestorm:** Like Firestorm, this viewer is derived from the official [Second Life](https://github.com/secondlife/viewer) client. The client codebase has been open source since 2007 and is available under the LGPL license. This project continues to be open and welcomes contributions within its focused scope.
>*   **Alpha Software:** Aperture Viewer is currently in **Alpha development**. Expect instability, bugs, and incomplete features. It is provided for **testing and early access purposes only.**
>*   **Hardware Demands:** Aperture Viewer may include experimental features that are **demanding on computer hardware.** Performance may vary, and you may need a powerful system to run it smoothly at higher settings.
---


## Key Features: Novel Visual Features for Testing and Feedback

Aperture Viewer provides access to new visual features that are under development within this independent fork. It is a platform for users to experience and test these innovations, and to provide feedback that may help guide future visual development in this project.

**Current Focus Areas for Testing and Feedback:**

*   **Pre-Release Visual Enhancements:** Test new rendering controls and visual improvements currently under development in Aperture Viewer.
*   **Exclusive Groundbreaking Rendering Innovations:**  Experience pioneering rendering controls being explored in this fork, such as Fluid Global Animation Speed control and Dynamic SSAO Sample Count Control.
*   **Visual Quality Focus:** Experience a viewer tuned for high visual fidelity, reflecting a focus on pushing visual boundaries.
*   **Based on Firestorm Stability:** Built upon the robust Firestorm codebase, ensuring a familiar and relatively stable base for experimentation.

**Roadmap for Visual Feature Exploration and Continuous Development:**

Aperture Viewer is under **active development** and will continue to serve as a platform for exploring, **developing**, and testing visual feature enhancements within this independent fork.  **We have a dynamic roadmap of visual improvements currently under development and planned for the future.** User feedback remains highly valuable and directly guides the direction of **this ongoing visual development** within Aperture Viewer.  **We are actively working on and anticipate adding many more advanced tools and capabilities for users to test and provide feedback on in the coming months and beyond.**  This is a continuously evolving project dedicated to pushing visual boundaries.

[Learn more about the specific innovations in Aperture Viewer on the Features page.](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Features)

---

## Aperture Viewer Wiki: Your Guide & Contribution Hub

Explore the Aperture Viewer Wiki for in-depth documentation on all features, including Phototools.  This comprehensive resource provides guides for photomaking and videography, drawing on decades of experience and incorporating YouTube video tutorials.

**Wiki Navigation:**

*   **Getting Started:**  [Download & Installation](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Download-&-Installation), [Getting Started](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Getting-Started), [Troubleshooting & FAQ](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Troubleshooting)
*   **About Aperture Viewer:** [History & Development](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/History-and-Development), [Change Log](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Change-Log), [Credits & Acknowledgements](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Credits-&-Acknowledgements), [Contact & Support](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Contact-&-Support)
*   **Features & Guides:** [Viewer Features](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Viewer-Features), [Phototools Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Phototools-Guide), [Environment Presets Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Environment-Presets-Guide), [Camera Tools Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Cameratools-Floater) **... and more!** (See Wiki Table of Contents)

**Contribute to Aperture Viewer:**  The Wiki also provides information on how you can contribute to the project through code, feedback, and feature suggestions.  See the [Wiki Home](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Home) and relevant pages for details.

---


## Credits

**Aperture Viewer is built upon the foundation of the Firestorm Viewer Project and utilizes code from Firestorm.**  This independent project would not be possible without the immense and ongoing work of the Firestorm team, who have created and maintain a robust and open-source viewer codebase.  We gratefully acknowledge their contributions to the Second Life and OpenSim communities.

We also extend our sincere appreciation to **Linden Lab and their developers and staff** for their foundational commitment to open source and for creating the Second Life platform that enables independent projects like Aperture Viewer to exist.

Aperture Viewer is maintained by William Weaver and is an independent project focused on visual experimentation. The Phototools system, a key area of focus, builds upon the original Phototools design by William Weaver.

[For detailed credits and acknowledgements, please see the Wiki Credits & Acknowledgements page.](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Credits-&-Acknowledgements)

---

## Download (Windows AVX Alpha Releases)

Currently, pre-built alpha versions of **Aperture Viewer** are available for **Windows (AVX instruction set)** only. These releases are for testing and early access and should be considered **Alpha quality** unless otherwise stated.

[Releases](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/releases)

**Please note:** These alpha releases are primarily for Windows users with AVX-compatible processors and include FMOD audio support. Releases are tested, but are still in early development stages.

## Build Instructions (Firestorm Instructions Apply)

For now, build instructions are largely the same as for Firestorm. Please refer to the links below for guidance:

- [Windows](doc/building_windows.md)
- [Mac](doc/building_macos.md)
- [Linux](doc/building_linux.md)

> [!NOTE]
> As with Firestorm self-compiles, support for compiling this viewer or issues from self-compiled versions is limited. The [Firestorm Self Compilers](https://tinyurl.com/firestorm-self-compilers) group may be helpful for general build questions.

---

## Privacy Commitment - User Data and Transparency

**Aperture Viewer is designed with user privacy as a core principle.** We want to be clear and upfront about our approach to your data:

*   **No User Data Collection:** Aperture Viewer **does not collect any personal data** related to your usage of the viewer. We do not track your in-world activities, chat logs, personal information, or system details.
*   **No Data Collection Infrastructure:** We do not operate any server infrastructure intended to collect or store user data from Aperture Viewer. We simply do not have the means or systems in place to collect your data through the viewer software.
*   **Open Source Transparency:** Aperture Viewer is **open source.** You can **review the entire source code** in this repository at any time to verify our claims about data privacy and confirm that we are not collecting data in the background. This transparency is fundamental to our commitment to user trust and privacy.

**For detailed information, please review our full [Privacy Policy](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Privacy-Policy) and [Terms of Service](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Terms-of-Service).**

---
## Public Development and Policy Considerations

Aperture Viewer offers interested users direct access to experimental features as they are developed openly on GitHub.  Even as a development testbed, this project is committed to upholding the principles of responsible open-source development, including striving to adhere to Firestorm's "Good Neighbor" policies and respecting Linden Lab's policies and Terms of Service.  **Because of** this commitment to a transparent and respectful testing environment, we provide extensive documentation, clear privacy and terms of use policies, readily available support contact information, and opportunities for user contribution. By using Aperture Viewer, users agree to be bound by the Linden Lab Third Party Viewer Policy and Terms of Service.

**We invite you to explore the Aperture Viewer repository, download the alpha releases (if you are interested in testing), and contribute to the future of visual innovation in Second Life and OpenSim!**

Commit message:

feat: Add How-To Guides wiki page and update documentation
This commit introduces a new "How-To Guides" wiki page to serve as a central hub for educational resources on virtual photography and videography using Aperture Viewer.

**Key changes included in this commit:**

*   **Created "How-To Guides" Main Wiki Page:**
    *   Developed a new wiki page (`How-To-Guides.md`) explaining the concept of the How-To Guides as short courses on virtual photography and videography, not just interface tutorials.
    *   Listed the initial three guides: "Red Light B&W in SL," "Point & Projection Lights," and "Environment Presets Tutorial."
    *   Included a YouTube channel image linking to the "Colors Completely" channel for further video resources.
    *   Utilized bullet points with bolded alert types for important notices and tips for GitHub Markdown compatibility.

*   **Updated Wiki Navigation in README.md:**
    *   Added a link to the new "How-To Guides" page within the "Wiki Navigation" section of the main `README.md` file. This improves discoverability of the new guide section on the GitHub homepage.

*   **Alert Formatting Consistency:**
    *   Ensured all alert boxes across updated wiki pages ("Gen Tab," "Aids Tab," "Shdw Tab," "VFX Tab," "How-To Guides") are replaced with bullet points and bolded alert types for improved GitHub Markdown rendering compatibility, resolving previous formatting issues.

These changes enhance the Aperture Viewer wiki by providing a structured entry point for educational content and improving the overall readability and consistency of the documentation.  The How-To Guides section is intended to grow, offering users valuable resources for mastering virtual photography and videography techniques within Second Life and OpenSim using Aperture Viewer.

README.md, after:

<p align="left">
  <img align="left" width="150" height="150" src="https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/blob/dev/doc/Aperture_256.png" alt="Aperture Viewer - Advanced Photography and Videomaking Viewer">
</p>

# Aperture Viewer: Development Fork for Pioneering Visual Experimentation (Based on Firestorm)

**Independent Development - Test Releases, Learning Hub**

> [!NOTE]
> This project and its GitHub serve as a learning hub for advanced visual techniques and user feedback, in addition to being a testbed for new features.

Aperture Viewer is an independent fork of Firestorm by William Weaver, created for **novel visual feature exploration** in Second Life and OpenSim.  Not an official Firestorm project and not intended to compete, Aperture Viewer is a personal testbed, built on Firestorm, for developing and testing features with user feedback.  Aperture Viewer and its GitHub also function as a learning hub, to:

*   **Investigate Advanced Visual Techniques:** Explore innovative graphics enhancements in Second Life/OpenSim.
*   **Develop & Refine Artistic Tools:** Enhance Phototools and visual controls for advanced image creation.
*   **Gather User Feedback:** Offer a public platform to test and provide input on new features.

**Focused on Visual Exploration, Learning, and User Feedback**

Aperture Viewer, focused on visual exploration, learning, and user feedback, is tailored for virtual photographers and videomakers interested in next-generation visuals in Second Life/OpenSim. It offers a platform for innovative rendering experiments and the enhanced Phototools system by William Weaver. Beyond code, Aperture Viewer is a valuable learning resource. Features are developmental, with no guarantee of Firestorm integration.

For those unfamiliar with William Weaver's virtual photography and videomaking work, see examples on his [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@colorscompletely/featured) and in these online photobooks:

[![none of this is real - photobook - Click to Open PDF](doc/none_of_this_is_real_cover.png)](doc/none_of_this_is_real_Optimized.pdf)

[![we all have this madness - photobook - Click to Open PDF](doc/we_all_have_this_madness_cover.png)](doc/we_all_have_this_madness.pdf)


<br/>

> [!IMPORTANT]
>**Important Disclaimer:** **Aperture Viewer is not a substitute for Firestorm Viewer for general use and is not supported by Linden Lab or the Firestorm Viewer Project.** This is an independent, community-developed *test* project based on the open-source Firestorm Viewer code, intended for visual experimentation, user feedback, and as a learning resource.
>*   **Open Source Based on Firestorm:** Like Firestorm, this viewer is derived from the official [Second Life](https://github.com/secondlife/viewer) client. The client codebase has been open source since 2007 and is available under the LGPL license. This project continues to be open and welcomes contributions within its focused scope.
>*   **Alpha Software:** Aperture Viewer is currently in **Alpha development**. Expect instability, bugs, and incomplete features. It is provided for **testing and early access purposes only.**
>*   **Hardware Demands:** Aperture Viewer may include experimental features that are **demanding on computer hardware.** Performance may vary, and you may need a powerful system to run it smoothly at higher settings.
---


## Key Features: Novel Visual Features for Testing and Feedback

Aperture Viewer provides access to new visual features that are under development within this independent fork. It is a platform for users to experience and test these innovations, and to provide feedback that may help guide future visual development in this project.

**Current Focus Areas for Testing and Feedback:**

*   **Pre-Release Visual Enhancements:** Test new rendering controls and visual improvements currently under development in Aperture Viewer.
*   **Exclusive Groundbreaking Rendering Innovations:**  Experience pioneering rendering controls being explored in this fork, such as Fluid Global Animation Speed control and Dynamic SSAO Sample Count Control.
*   **Visual Quality Focus:** Experience a viewer tuned for high visual fidelity, reflecting a focus on pushing visual boundaries.
*   **Based on Firestorm Stability:** Built upon the robust Firestorm codebase, ensuring a familiar and relatively stable base for experimentation.

**Roadmap for Visual Feature Exploration and Continuous Development:**

Aperture Viewer is under **active development** and will continue to serve as a platform for exploring, **developing**, and testing visual feature enhancements within this independent fork.  **We have a dynamic roadmap of visual improvements currently under development and planned for the future.** User feedback remains highly valuable and directly guides the direction of **this ongoing visual development** within Aperture Viewer.  **We are actively working on and anticipate adding many more advanced tools and capabilities for users to test and provide feedback on in the coming months and beyond.**  This is a continuously evolving project dedicated to pushing visual boundaries.

[Learn more about the specific innovations in Aperture Viewer on the Features page.](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Features)

---

## Aperture Viewer Wiki: Your Guide & Contribution Hub

Explore the Aperture Viewer Wiki for in-depth documentation on all features, including Phototools.  This comprehensive resource provides guides for photomaking and videography, drawing on decades of experience and incorporating YouTube video tutorials.

> [!TIP]
> **New to Aperture Viewer?** Start with the **Getting Started** section in the Wiki Navigation below for download, installation, and basic usage information.

**Wiki Navigation:**

*   **Getting Started:**  [Download & Installation](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Download-&-Installation), [Getting Started](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Getting-Started), [Troubleshooting & FAQ](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Troubleshooting)
*   **About Aperture Viewer:** [History & Development](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/History-and-Development), [Change Log](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Change-Log), [Credits & Acknowledgements](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Credits-&-Acknowledgements), [Contact & Support](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Contact-&-Support)
*   **Features & Guides:** [Viewer Features](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Viewer-Features), [Phototools Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Phototools-Guide), [Environment Presets Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Environment-Presets-Tutorial), [Camera Tools Guide](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Cameratools-Floater), **[How-To Guides](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/How%E2%80%90To-Guides)** **... and more!** (See Wiki Table of Contents)

**Contribute to Aperture Viewer:**  The Wiki also provides information on how you can contribute to the project through code, feedback, and feature suggestions.  See the [Wiki Home](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Home) and relevant pages for details.

---


## Credits

**Aperture Viewer is built upon the foundation of the Firestorm Viewer Project and utilizes code from Firestorm.**  This independent project would not be possible without the immense and ongoing work of the Firestorm team, who have created and maintain a robust and open-source viewer codebase.  We gratefully acknowledge their contributions to the Second Life and OpenSim communities.

We also extend our sincere appreciation to **Linden Lab and their developers and staff** for their foundational commitment to open source and for creating the Second Life platform that enables independent projects like Aperture Viewer to exist.

Aperture Viewer is maintained by William Weaver and is an independent project focused on visual experimentation. The Phototools system, a key area of focus, builds upon the original Phototools design by William Weaver.

[For detailed credits and acknowledgements, please see the Wiki Credits & Acknowledgements page.](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Credits-&-Acknowledgements)

---

## Download (Windows AVX Alpha Releases)

> [!WARNING]
> **Windows AVX Alpha Releases ONLY:**  Currently, pre-built alpha versions of Aperture Viewer are **only available for Windows systems with AVX instruction set compatible processors.**  Releases for other platforms are not yet available.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Alpha Quality - For Testing:** These releases are for **testing and early access** and should be considered **Alpha quality** unless otherwise stated. Expect instability and bugs.

[Releases](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/releases)

**Please note:** These alpha releases are primarily for Windows users with AVX-compatible processors and include FMOD audio support. Releases are tested, but are still in early development stages.

## Build Instructions (Firestorm Instructions Apply)

For now, build instructions are largely the same as for Firestorm. Please refer to the links below for guidance:

- [Windows](doc/building_windows.md)
- [Mac](doc/building_macos.md)
- [Linux](doc/building_linux.md)

> [!CAUTION]
> **Limited Support for Self-Compiles:** As with Firestorm self-compiles, official support for compiling Aperture Viewer yourself or for issues arising from self-compiled versions is limited.  Consult the [Firestorm Self Compilers](https://tinyurl.com/firestorm-self-compilers) group for general build questions.

---

## Privacy Commitment - User Data and Transparency

**Aperture Viewer is designed with user privacy as a core principle.** We want to be clear and upfront about our approach to your data:

*   **No User Data Collection:** Aperture Viewer **does not collect any personal data** related to your usage of the viewer. We do not track your in-world activities, chat logs, personal information, or system details.
*   **No Data Collection Infrastructure:** We do not operate any server infrastructure intended to collect or store user data from Aperture Viewer. We simply do not have the means or systems in place to collect your data through the viewer software.
*   **Open Source Transparency:** Aperture Viewer is **open source.** You can **review the entire source code** in this repository at any time to verify our claims about data privacy and confirm that we are not collecting data in the background. This transparency is fundamental to our commitment to user trust and privacy.

**For detailed information, please review our full [Privacy Policy](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Privacy-Policy) and [Terms of Service](https://github.com/williamweaver/Aperture-Viewer/wiki/Terms-of-Service).**

---
## Public Development and Policy Considerations

Aperture Viewer offers interested users direct access to experimental features as they are developed openly on GitHub.  Even as a development testbed, this project is committed to upholding the principles of responsible open-source development, including striving to adhere to Firestorm's "Good Neighbor" policies and respecting Linden Lab's policies and Terms of Service.  **Because of** this commitment to a transparent and respectful testing environment, we provide extensive documentation, clear privacy and terms of use policies, readily available support contact information, and opportunities for user contribution. By using Aperture Viewer, users agree to be bound by the Linden Lab Third Party Viewer Policy and Terms of Service.

**We invite you to explore the Aperture Viewer repository, download the alpha releases (if you are interested in testing), and contribute to the future of visual innovation in Second Life and OpenSim!**
